It was Nikolai Vavilov, the great Russian botanist, who first identified the wild apple's Eden in the forests around Alma Ata, in Kazakhstan, in nineteen twenty nine. (This wouldn't have come as news to the locals, however: Alma Ata means father of the apple.) All around the city one could see a vast expanse of wild apples covering the foothills, he wrote. One could see with his own eyes that this beautiful site was the origin of the cultivated apple. Vavilov eventually fell victim to Stalin's wholesale repudiation of genetics, starving to death in a Leningrad prison in nineteen forty three, and his discovery was lost to science until the fall of communism. In nineteen eighty nine, one of Vavilov's last surviving students, a botanist named Aimak Djangaliev, invited a group of American plant scientists to see the wild apples he had been studying, very quietly, during the long years of Soviet rule. Djangaliev was already eighty, and he wanted the Americans' help to save the wild stands of Malus sieversii from a wave of real estate development spreading out from Alma Ata to the surrounding hills.

Forsline and his colleagues were astonished to find entire forests of apples, three hundred year old trees fifty feet tall and as big around as oaks, some of them bearing apples as large and red as modern cultivated varieties. Even in the towns, apple trees were coming up in the cracks of the sidewalks, he recalled. You looked at these apples and felt sure you were looking at the ancestor of the Golden Delicious or the Macintosh. Forsline determined to save as much of this germ plasm as possible. He felt certain that somewhere among the wild apples of Kazakhstan could be found genes for disease and pest resistance, as well as apple qualities beyond our imagining. Since the wild apple's survival in the wild was now in doubt, he collected hundreds of thousands of seeds, planted as many as he had space for in Geneva, and then offered the rest to researchers and breeders around the world. I'll send seeds to anybody who asks, just so long as they promise to plant them, tend to the trees, and then report back someday. The wild apples had found their Johnny Appleseed.

And then there they were, two extravagantly jumbled rows of the weirdest apples I'd ever laid eyes on. The trees had been crammed in cheek by jowl, and the aisles could barely contain, much less order, the luxuriant riot of foliage and fruit, even though it had been planted only six years before. I'd never seen an orchard of apple seedlings (few people nowadays ever do), though it's hard to imagine another seedling orchard quite so crazed by diversity. Forsline had told me that all the apple genes heretofore brought to America -- all the genes floating down the Ohio River alongside John Chapman -- represented maybe a tenth of the entire Malus genome. Well, here was the rest of it.

No two of these trees looked even remotely alike, not in form or leaf or fruit. Some grew straight for the sun, others trailed along the ground or formed low shrubs or simply petered out, the upstate New York climate not to their liking. I saw apples with leaves like those of linden trees, others shaped like demented forsythia bushes. Maybe a third of the trees were bearing fruit -- but strange, strange fruit that looked and tasted like God's first drafts of what an apple could be.

I saw apples with the hue and heft of olives and cherries alongside glowing yellow Ping Pong balls and dusky purple berries. I saw a whole assortment of baseballs, oblate and conic and perfectly round, some of them bright as infield grass, others dull as wood. And I picked big, shiny red fruits that looked just like apples, of all things, though their taste, their taste was something else again. Imagine sinking your teeth into a tart potato or a slightly mushy Brazil nut covered in leather. On first bite some of these apples would start out with high promise on the tongue -- Now, here's an apple! -- only to suddenly veer into a bitterness so profound it makes my stomach rise even in recollection.
